Welcome to the next
week of our course
on parallel functional
programming with Java.
Previous weeks have focused
on the three phases in a Java
stream, including splitting,
which converts a data
source into a stream,
applying, which processes
the elements in the stream
via intermediate operations,
and combining, which triggers
intermediate operation
processing and creates
a single reduced result.
These three phases
have default behaviors
that apply to many Java
collections and use cases.
However, there are
situations where
it's essential to customize
aspects of these phases,
either to improve performance
or to support user-defined data
sources.
We therefore start this week
by examining the inner workings
of the Java streams framework
to demonstrate which
of its splitting, applying,
and combining phases
can be customized,
as well as showing
how and when to customize them.
We first explain how the Java
streams framework constructs
a stream pipeline at
runtime via a linked
list of stream source and
intermediate operations,
where each node in
this linked list
comprises a stage in
the stream pipeline.
We then describe how the
stream's framework executes
stages in this linked list,
based on stream source
and operation
properties, such as
whether the intermediate
operations have stateless
versus stateful semantics and
whether the terminal operation
has a run to completion versus
short-circuiting semantics.
We next explore how to
customize stream creation
by examining the structure and
functionality of spliterators,
which are splittable iterators
used by the streams framework
to partition and traverse all
elements of a data source.
We analyze a sequential
spliterator implementation
for the simple search
stream program,
which uses Java regular
expressions to create streams
of objects that
indicate locations
where a search word
appears in an input string.
The final topic this week
[? shows ?] [? us a ?]
customized sequential
stream collection phase
by non-concurrent collectors.
A collector is the
inverse of a spliterator
in that a spliterator
partitions a single data
source into a
stream of elements,
whereas the collector combines
a stream of elements back
into a single result. The
collect terminal operation
uses a collector to
accumulate stream elements
into a so-called mutable
result container.
We analyze examples of
predefined non-concurrent
collectors provided by the
Java streams framework,
as well as several
custom implementations
of non-concurrent collectors
from the simple search stream
program.
In upcoming lessons
in later weeks,
we'll expand our
coverage of collectors
to include both non-concurrent
and concurrent collectors
for Java parallel streams.